Gemini CLI is designed for any task that
requires working with local files and
multiple tools. In this lesson, you'll
see how Gemini CLI works under the hood.
You'll also learn why working from the
command line gives you powerful
advantages over web interfaces. I hope
this lesson will spark ideas about
what's possible with Gemini CLI. Let's
dive in. So, throughout this course, we
are going to go over different use cases
where you can use Gemini CLI to your
advantage. And it's quite vast what
Gemini CLI can do. You can do it for
software development. You can have it
implement features. You can actually
have it review code as a GitHub action
in a CI/CD pipeline. You can also use
Gemini CLI for content creation. So,
we're going to show you how you can
actually take a podcast, break it up
into shorts, and generate content for
social media. And we'll use some really
cool technologies such as Nano Banana.
Gemini CLI can also be used for data
analysis. Later in this course, we are
going to take quite a large data set of
CSV files and actually have Gemini CLI
go ahead and process it. It's going to
clean the data and then we're going to
have it generate some really nice
visualization dashboards for us. We're
also going to show how you can actually
use Gemini CLI as a study buddy. We'll
have Gemini CLI go over course notes for
us, build summaries, and then build
interactive tests to help us make sure
we're ready to go and have learned the
material. So now what you've come here
for, what is Gemini CLI? Gemini CLI is
an agent that lives in the terminal.
This means you can easily install it.
It's very lightweight. You can just
prompt and ask questions and the agent
will go off, do research on your behalf.
It'll find the files it needs to access
and read the contents and then use that
to give you a really clear response.
It's a conversational AI agent at heart
and it's meant to be an interactive
assistant. You're supposed to go back
and forth with [clears throat] the agent
to help you accomplish and perform the
tasks you need. So, as we mentioned,
Gemini CLI is open source. The community
helps drive a lot of the feature
development. You can actually go and
inspect every single line of code and it
means you can actually go ahead and
customize. You can fork the code, add in
your own features, or create your own
version of Gemini CLI. And finally, the
name kind of gives it away, but it is
powered and backed by Gemini models. The
free tier actually comes with a very
generous amount of requests. so that you
can actually use this tool absolutely
free of charge for your daily work. So
let's take a step back and look under
the hood of Gemini CLI so we know how it
actually works. You send a prompt. This
is sent to a large language model, the
Gemini models, and it does the reasoning
to understand what tools it needs. If it
needs to process any information, if it
needs to request follow-up information
from you, the user, then it's going to
go ahead and actually call the tools in
order to generate the proper response.
And it can go through this process
multiple times. So it can iterate
through calling different tools, getting
different information sent to it and
doing the reasoning on it until it is
satisfied with the response before it
sends it back to you. This is really
powerful because it means Gemini CLI can
run for extended periods of time doing
reasoning and looping through different
tool calls in order to build out entire
applications or debug really tricky
issues on your behalf so that you can
spend time doing what you do best and
building. So let's take a look at the
actual advantages of using a terminal
agent. The main one being that has
direct access to your file system. So
all of the files on your machine, Gemini
CLI can go and read the ones it needs to
help answer your questions. This helps
it be contextaware. This makes it very
conversational and makes it feel like a
partner in a task. Another one of the
key advantages to a terminal based agent
like Gemini CLI is that is really a
Swiss Army knife of tools. anything you
have installed on your local computer,
Gemini CLI's access to it can actually
go out and install things for you. So,
for instance, if you're deploying an
application or you want to check logs of
a deployed service, you can actually
have Gemini CLI use G-Cloud to go ahead
and pull those logs in. This really
helps you stop context switching because
Gemini CLI can install the tools and
execute them on your behalf. Some use
cases where this comes in handy,
automation and scripting. instead of
having to go learn about how to do
something, you can actually have Gemini
CLI just build a script and then it can
run it for you. One of the advantages of
Gemini CLI is also its vast extensions
ecosystem. And this really helps Gemini
CLI become fully customized so that any
task you're trying to complete can be
done through adding on extensions, MCP
servers or custom commands. At a base
layer, Gemini CLI comes with a bunch of
built-in tools. These are file systems
tools. List the directories, read files,
write to files, do search and edits.
Another cool capability of Gemini CLI is
that it actually has a web search tool.
This is really helpful when Gemini CLI
needs access to things that maybe were
just released or there was things in the
news. You want it to do some research on
fresh data that it wasn't trained on. As
we mentioned, it also has shell tools.
So, it can run any single application on
your machine through shell commands. So
if you have GitHub CLI, it will go ahead
and actually run a shell command to
execute GitHub CLI and put up that pull
request for you. There's also other
tools such as the ability to save memory
so that when you use Gemini CLI often,
it can remember certain pieces of how
you like to customize your workflow or
certain details that you don't want to
have to repeat on every single session.
So, now that we've gone over the use
cases and the tools for Gemini CLI and
why it can be versatile, let's actually
show it off and get it installed on our
machines so that we can get going.